---
title: "750 words a day"
categories: [Writing]
date: 2014-10-29 10:51:35 -0700
---

I've had increased interest in writing throughout this year. In addition to
being a pleasant and fulfilling activity, it shown a number of benefits in my
everyday life and career:

- Composing emails became faster and easier. When you have to reply to a couple
  of dozen emails a day, speed and attention to details matters. Writing more
  taught me to write more concise emails which are easy to read.
- Writing a lot isn't a problem anymore. If I have to write documentation,
  comment code, or just put together a very long email - I'm not put off by the
  idea. I'm excited about it.
- Typing speed went up. [I already touch type][1], and constant writing practice
  increases the acquired speed. Fast typing makes life easier, speeding up
  mundane tasks, freeing up brain power for more costly activities.
- It's easy to keep a condensed work log to highlight the issues of the day.
  Tough programming issues, "Eureka!" moments, meeting notes - this historical
  data saved me hours or even days of repeating my mistakes.

A while ago, I've heard of a thing called ["750 words"][2], a site built around
a challenge to write 750 words a day in order to improve writing skills and
unleash creativity. This looked like a great idea, and I decided to give it a
shot. I prefer to keep my personal entries offline, and I decided not to use the
provided service, but to keep a set of plain text files on my local machine.
Which worked out just fine. It's all just text after all.

I lasted for 10 days in a row, which I am proud of (filling up approximately 3
pages a day was no easy task for me). I started of with silly entries about not
knowing what to write about, and finished with a piece of a fiction story.
That's a considerable improvement.

By the end of the challenge I was mentally exhausted. But it taught me a very
important lesson: the more you write, the better you become. And that's one of
the main reasons I keep crafting new entries for this blog.

This happened half a year ago, I just never got around to writing about it. I
will go ahead and start another 750 words spree today. Maybe this time I'll be
able to make it last for the whole month.

[1]: https://rosipov.com/blog/why-should-you-learn-to-touch-type/
[2]: http://750words.com/
